and as soon as you allow for the
possibility of like your Footprints
lasting longer than your lifespan this
is a whole new ball game either in the
form of there's an afterlife or in the
form of I want to leave a planet for my
great great grandchildren that's going
to be a more peaceful wonderful
one whoa that's a whole other world of
like what you're doing now the
footprints you leave after you are going
to
[Music]
matter hello everyone watching and
listening today I'm speaking with
primatologist neuroendocrinology
researcher an author of multiple books
including the upcoming determined a
science of life without without Free
Will Dr Robert
spolski we discuss Game Theory and how
it applies to human behavior the
unexpected success of the tit fortat
negotiating principle the role of the
neurochemical dopamine in reward
reinforcement and the anticipation of
the future and the potentially objective
reality of transcendent ethical
structures operating within the
biological domain so I was reading
um in some detail I've read a number of
your other books I've followed your
career for a long time I'm very
interested in primatology and in
Neuroscience so that that makes her
interesting reading reading as far as
I'm concerned the thing that really
struck me in behave is the are the
sections on Game Theory and I I wanted
to start talking about Game Theory
because it first of all the terminology
is strange because Game Theory I mean
you could hardly imagine something that
might sound more trivial than that I
mean first of all it's games and second
of all it's Theory but there's
absolutely nothing whatsoever that's
even minimally trivial about Game Theory
it's unbelievably important you know and
I kind of stumbled across it sideways I
was reading work by Yak PP uh who did a
lot of work with rats and PP showed that
if you paired rats repeatedly together
juvenile males and you allowed them to
play the little rat who had to invite to
play once dominance had been established
he would stop inviting to play if the
big rat didn't let him win 30% at the
time in repeated bouts say and I thought
oh my God that's so cool because what
you see there is something like an
emergent morality of play in rats merely
as a consequence of the repeated pairing
of of of the same individuals you know
across an indeterminate landscape and
that's an
unbelievably compelling and stunning
Discovery because it it it indicates
something like the emergence of a
spontaneous morality now you talk about
Game Theory do you want to review for
everybody first of all what game theory
is and then what the major findings of
the field are we can talk about tit
fortat and the variations but please let
everybody know what game theory is and
why it's so important sure maybe well
just emphasize the point you made right
from the start that this is not fun in
game
um game theory was mostly the the
purview of War strategists and diplomats
and people planning you know mutually
assured destruction so uh this was
rather serious stuff at some point uh
the biologists got a hold of it and
especially
zoologists and the sort of rationale was
like you look at a giraffe and you're
some
cardiovascular giraffe person and you do
all these calculations about like if
you're going to have a head that's that
far above your heart and you're going to
have this body weight and blah blah what
you're gonna have to have a heart with
its walls that are this thick or this
like vascular properties and then the
scientists go and study it and that's
exactly what you see isn't that amazing
isn't nature wonderful or like you look
at Desert WFTS and you do all this
theoretical modeling stuff and figure
out if they're going to survive in the
desert their kidneys have to retain
water at this unbelievable rate and then
people would go and study it and that's
exactly how the kidneys work isn't that
amazing and it's not so amazing because
like if you're gonna have giraffes
shaped like giraffe the heart has to be
that way there is an intrinsic logic to
how it had to evolve and if you're going
to be a desert rodent there's an
intrinsic logic to how your kidneys go
about living in the desert and the whole
notion of Game Theory as applied to
evolution animal behavior human behavior
Etc is there's an intrinsic Logic the
logic of our Behavior has been as
sculpted by evolutionary exigencies as
the logic of our hearts and the logic of
our kidneys and everything else in there
and by the time it comes to behavior a
lot of it is built around when is the
optimal time to do X and when do you do
the opposite of
X so you talk about all right so so
let's let's review that for a minute so
your
point as I understand it is that there's
going to be necessary constraints on the
physiology of a organism and those
constraints are going to be reflective
of its environment and the peculiarities
of its morphology and you can predict
that a prior and then when you match
your predictions against observation at
least some of the times they
match there's an analogy between that
and behavior in that you can analyze the
context in which behavior occurs and the
physiology of the organism you do that
in particular and behave with the as you
map out the nervous system from the
hypothalamus upward toward the
prefrontal cortex there's going to be an
interaction between context and and and
Physiology that's necessary the context
of behavior isn't the
mere requiting of primordial and
immediate needs the context of behavior
is in part the reciprocal interactions
that occur in a very large social space
between many individuals many of whom
will interact
repeatedly and there's something about
repeated inter interactions that's
absolutely crucial so one of the things
you point out for example is that and
this was also true of pp's rat studies
if you just put two rats together once
geez the big rat might as well just eat
the little rat because what the hell you
know maybe he's hungry and the little
rat can be a meal and there are
circumstances under which that occurs
but if the rats are going to be together
in a social environment and they're also
surrounded by relative rats and friend
rats then the landscape of need
gratification starts to switch
dramatically because you don't just have
the requirement of satisfying the
immediate need of the single individual
right now you have the problem of
iterated needs across vast spans of time
in a complex social environment and
wonderful jargon for it is the shadow of
the future
which right right talk about that which
is wonderful poetic way of yeah exactly
that
notion yeah well in the future has a
shape too right because the farther out
you go into the future the more
unpredictable it is but it doesn't ever
deteriorate exactly to zero
predictability and I know there's a
future discounting literature what what
do they that that's associated with time
preference that also calculates the
degree to which people regulate their
behavior in the present in accordance
with likely future contingencies one of
the things you point out and and this is
one of the ways your book is integrated
I I believe is that as you move upward
in the hierarchy of the nervous system
towards the more recently evolved brain
areas let's say towards the prefrontal
cortex the more you get the constraint
of immediate Behavior by Future uh what
would you say future contingencies right
and you describe that in behave as
difficult it's very easy to fall prey to
an immediate impulse anger is a good
example of that or maybe fear right that
grips you and forces you to act in the
moment but you want to constrain your
impulses which would be manifestations
of brain circuits that are much more
evolutionarily ancient you want to
constrain those with increased knowledge
of multiple future possibilities in a
complex social landscape and those are
also somewhat specific to the
circumstance so the prefrontal cortex
also is more programmable because the
relationship between the future and the
present varies quite substantially with
the particularities of the environment
but the fundamental point is that in the
game in game theory is that your the
consequences of your immediate action
have to be bounded by the future and by
the social context so I was thinking
about something here recently you tell
me what you think about this because you
write a little bit about religious
issues in your book book too although
not a lot but
some so I was thinking about this uh
notion that you should love your enemy
as yourself or that and that you should
treat your neighbor as if he's yourself
I mean one of those is an extension of
the other and I think there's actually a
technical reason for that tell me what
you think of this logic so you the first
question might be what is yourself the
self you're trying to protect and one
answer to that is it's what you want
right now and what would protect you
right now but another answer is yeah
fair enough you know now matters but
there's going to be you tomorrow and you
next week and you in a month and you in
a year and five years and what that
implies is that you yourself are a
community that stretches across time and
you as that Community you're also going
to be very varied in your manifestation
sometimes you're going to be like top
Lobster and dominant as hell and
sometimes you're going to be sick and in
the hospital and there's going to be a
lot of Vari and who you are across time
and so if you're treating yourself
properly in the highest sense you're
going to treat yourself as that
community that extends across time and
then I would say there's actually no
difference technically and maybe this is
a game theory proposition there's no
difference between that technically and
treating other people well is that
you're a community across time just like
the community is a community and the
ethical obligation
to yourself as an extended creature is
identical with the obligation that you
have all things considered to other
people so I'm wondering what you think
about that proposition if that makes
sense to you if you think there might be
exceptions to that um that makes perfect
sense because that immediately dumps you
into the are there any real altruists
out there uh scratch an altruist and a
narcissist beled sort of thing that
anything within the realm
of self-c constraint and forward-looking
pro-sociality and all of that what
somewhere in there is running in between
the lines is the Golden Rule and in the
long run this will be better if I do
this and what def species is you know
two lobsters can do Game Theory
dominance displays um but we are the
species that is dominated by the concept
of in the long run with the Lu or the
more frontally regulated among us but
that's absolutely the heart of it and
which has always struck me sort it's
very easy to like dump on utilitarian
thinking and because it's always easy to
say oh my God so would you push your
grandmother in front of the runaway
trolley and it just feels wrong and
would you convict an innocent person if
that's going to make Society better in
all of those scenarios where uh
utilitarian thinking just sticks in your
throat it just doesn't feel right and
where the resolution always is is
utilitarian thinking in the long run if
it's okay to do this what are we G to
decide is okay to do tomorrow and what
right slope are we G to be heading down
and it requires a sort of deep distal
not just proximal
utilitarian mindset and when you work in
Shadow of the future and in the long
run suddenly uh what winds up being uh
you know the easiest possible solution
to maximizing everyone's good looks a
whole lot more
palatable yeah well those those strange
questions that come up when
people they pick these contexts where
utilitarian thinking seems to involve a
paradox I mean those are paradoxes of
Duty and they do come up but that all
that indicates and I think this is what
you're pointing out all that indicates
is that there are often conflicts
between what seems morally appropriate
immediately and what seems morally
appropriate when it's iterated and
sometimes those conflicts are going to
be intense and of course those are the
ones that we have a very difficult time
calculating and no wonder but I would
also say th those are also the times
when intense negotiation is necessary
you know like if you and I are in a
situation where my immediate good
and our long-term good are in Conflict
then I better talk to you a bunch to
find out what at least you know what the
most livable solution is even if we
can't do it perfectly and the fact that
there's going to be conflicts doesn't
invalidate the general necessity of
having to consider iteration now you
talk a lot in the book about Tit for Tat
and so why don't you outline that for
people too cuz lots of people listening
again this is one of these things that
just sounds it sounds trivial when you
first encounter especially the computer
simulations but it's absolutely it's of
stunning importance once again so do you
want to outline the science behind these
iterative game competitions and the fact
that Tit for Tat emerged as a solution
and then the variations around that too
let's get into those well first off just
to sort of build on one of your points
there that repeated rounds repeated
rounds um repeated rounds of an
unpredictable number if you're going to
have competive interaction with someone
do you stab them in the back or do you
cooperate or and your starting point is
you're never going to see this person
again and they have no means of telling
anyone else on Earth if you were a jerk
or whatever the only real politic thing
that anyone could ever do is don't
cooperate Saab them in the back if you
have only one round that you're going to
interact with and then you get this
horrible regressive thing that if you're
going to interact with them for two
rounds what's the logical thing to do on
the second round stab them in the back
so you've already defaulted into knowing
that the second round is going to be
non-cooperation so what do you do in the
first round you already know the second
round is a given so you might as well
stab them in the back on the first one
and if there's three rounds you go
backwards and at every one of those
points if you're hyper rational no
matter how many rounds ahead of you
there are if you know how many there are
going to be the only like
uber spocky and logical thing to do is
to never ever cooperate where the
Breakthrough comes in is when you don't
know how many rounds there are in the
future and that's where you get
selection for cooperation that's where
you see a world of differences in social
species who were migratory versus ones
who were not if I do something nice for
this guy is he going to be around next
Tuesday to help me out not if he's like
a Syrian Golden Hamster he's migratory
he's going to be gone on the other hand
if he's a human human living in a s sary
settlement yeah maybe if I could trust
him or not so yeah key point of an
unknown number of rounds in the future
because you never know you know putting
it most cynically how much of a chance
they're gonna have in the future to get
back at you if you were a jerk right now
in the present so that emphasis on
unknown number of rounds um what you
allude to is like the poster child the
fruit fly of people who do Game Theory
studies the prisoners dilemma where
essentially there's a whole story that
goes with it but you have to decide are
you going to cooperate with someone or
are you going to stab them in the back
and the way it works is if you both
cooperate you both get a decent reward
if you both stab each other in the back
you both get punished to a certain
extent but if you manage to get them to
cooperate with you but you you stab them
in the back they get a tremendous loss
and you get a huge number of brownie
points and conversely if they've
suckered you into being cooperative and
then they stabbed you in the back you're
way be so this whole world of when do
you coopera and when do you do anything
other than that always within this realm
of multiple rounds but unknown
number so this guy Robert Axel Rod who's
like this senior major figure in sort of
political science
um teamed up with this evolutionary
biologist um WG Hamilton one of one of
the Gods in that field and they said
well let's talk to a whole bunch of our
friends a whole bunch of our friends who
think seriously about this stuff and
tell them about the prisoners dilemma
and have each one of them tell us what
would their strategy be when playing the
prisoners dilemma how would you do an
unknown number of rounds and maximize
your wins at the end and they asked like
Nobel PR Peace Prize winners and Mother
Teresa and prize Fighters and Warlords
and mathematicians and they collected
just a zillion people's different
strategies and then they ran this round
robin tournament on this like ancient
1970s computer of just running each
strategy against all the other ones a
gazillion round to see which one worked
best which one won or in the terms that
evolutionary biologists quickly started
using which strategy drove all the
others into
Extinction and the thing that flattened
everybody was you had these people
putting in these algorithms and
probabilities and fuzzy logic and God
knows what and the one that beat all the
others was the simplest one out there
tit fortat you start off by cooperating
if the other guy is a jerk at some point
and stabs you in the back the next round
you Tit for Tat him back you stab him
back if he goes back to cooperating then
you go back to cooperating you've
forgiven him if he keeps on being a jerk
you keep on being a jerk and even though
what you see is by the person being a
jerk they're always one round ahead of
you and that seems pretty
disadvantageous you're always going to
be one step behind the individual stabed
you in the back when you get two jerky
cheaters together all do is constantly
stab each other in the back and they get
worst possible outcome and what you see
with something like that is with Tit for
Tat if you're a nice Cooperative guy and
start off with that assumption you lose
the battles with the jerks but you win
the wars because right right Cooperators
find each other and this strategy out
competed everyone and everyone couldn't
believe it because of how simplistic it
was and that was exactly it was a
straightforward it was easy to
understand its starting point was one of
cooperation giving somebody the benefit
of the doubt from the start it was
nonetheless not a sucker it was punitive
it was capable of
Retribution and if the uh the other
player who had like sinned against them
corrected their ways it was
forgiven and it was as simple and this
out competed all of the other on
and what everyone sort of in the zoology
World went about saying at that point is
oh my god do animals go about tit fortat
strategies when they're in competitive
circumstances where they've got to
decide am I going to cooperate or am I
going to cheat and that sort of thing
has Evolution sculpted optimal
competitive Cooperative behavior and all
sorts of species to solve the prisoners
dilemma problem and people went and
looked and it turned out like what do
you know Evolution had sculpted exactly
that in all sorts of species with like
phenomenal interesting findings where if
you like experimentally manipulate one
animal to make it look like they're not
reciprocating and something that
somebody else just did for them and
everybody punishes them one round
afterward and they go back to
cooperating again and everyone forgives
them that's tit for Te all sorts of
species out there were doing tit forat
fabulous example of this um I am
forgetting his name Wilkinson uh studies
bats bats some bat species they all do
communal nesting stuff all the female
bats have all their nest together and
they're communal in this literal sense
they're vampire bats which means they
fly out at night and they like get blood
from some cow or some victim or whatever
and they're not actually drinking the
blood they're storing it in their throat
sex and they come back to their nest and
what they do is they discourage the
blood then to feed their babies and the
hugely Cooperative cool thing about the
species is it's Cooperative feeding not
just among like sisters but through that
everybody feeds each other's kids that's
great so they've got this whole
collaborative system and it buffers you
against one animals failure to find food
one night and like everyone scratches
each other's back and it works wonderful
now make the bats think that one of them
is cheating one of them has violated
feeding all each other's kids social
contract when the bat comes out of the
cave or whatever you like net it and get
a hold of the bat and you pump up the
throat sack with air and you put her
back there in the nest and she doesn't
have any blood but everybody's looking
at her saying oh my God look at how big
her throat sack is look at all the blood
she has and she's not feeding my kid
she's reneging on our social contract
here and the next round nobody feeds her
kids for one round oh my God that has
evolved the optimal prisoners dilemma
strategy of Tit for Tat this was like
phenomenal what people then began to see
was out in the real world straight tiit
for Tad is not quite enough but suppose
you get a signal error and this is
straight out of I don't know we're we're
roughly the same age I don't know if you
grew up reading all those like cold war
terrifying novels if there's a glitch oh
yeah what what was it fail safe or
something we're we're gonna drop a
atomic bomb on Moscow by accident and
the only way to prove to them was an
accident they get to drop on on New York
and tit fortad and all of that and what
that introduced was the possibility of a
signal
error your operating but there's a
glitch in the system and the other
individual believes you just stabbed
them in the
back according to a recent report
Planned Parenthood continues to rake in
billions despite dwindling clients the
biggest takeaway here is that planed
Parenthood is generating vast profits
including millions in taxpayer funding
with the help of preborn you and me we
are stealing their clientel meaning the
babies they are trying to kill pre-born
operates on a very slim budget as they
rescue over 200 babies lives every day
and they receive no government funding
pre-born network of clinics are situated
in the darkest corners competing
head-to-head with the abortion Giants
they need our help now more than ever
when you donate $28 to preborn you will
offer a free ultrasound to an expectant
mother caught in crisis once she hears
that heartbeat and sees that precious
life her baby's chance at life doubles
if you would like to sponsor a precious
baby's life your gift will be
tax-deductible and will go directly
towards saving baby's lives dial pound
250 and say the keyword baby or visit
preborn
docomo all gifts are tax deductible you
will never regret saving a child's life
that's pound 250 baby or visit preborn
docomo yeah I think virtualization
probably increases signal error by the
way you know I've noticed that well I've
noticed that when I've put together
business enterprises that
um you can virtualize the cooperation
but if any misunderstanding emerges it
tends to Cascade very rapidly and you
don't have you know one of the things
you also point out and behave is that it
isn't only that you're playing a
sequence of iterated games with people
it's you're playing multiple sequences
of multiple different iterated games and
so one of the things that happens if
you're face Toof face with people as
opposed to Virtual is that when you're
face to face with them this is probably
the key importance of the issue of
hospitality which is very much stressed
for example in well it's stressed in the
Old Testament but it's stressed in um
traditional communities is that if
you're actually in an embodied space
with people you can play multiple games
with them games of humor games of food
exchange games of music dance
celebration and so you can test out
their capacity for reciprocity in
multiple situations and so then if
there's a signal error you can you can
mitigate against it because you know
that you've tested the person out in all
sorts of different circumstances but
when you virtualize things it's very
narrow the channel is now very narrow
yeah yeah and so I'm very concerned
about a lot of virtualization too
because the other thing I think the
virtualization is doing is enabling the
Psychopaths because you can do a lot of
one-off exchanges online with no
reputation tracking and that seems to me
that that enables the people who use
what did you call that uh in your book
there's a particular kind of strategy
well it's the stab you in the back
strategy essentially and if you you
can't track people's reputations across
time then you enable the people who are
essentially the psychopathic
manipulators and there's actually an
emergent literature on online trolling
and dark T dark tetrad traits so I'm
afraid we're enabling the Psychopaths
with the virtualization of the world and
that's a terrifying possibility because
they can take everybody out so yeah so
now you were talking about modifications
of tit
fortat well the you you bring up sort of
the the artificial in the dangers there
okay somebody suddenly from out of
nowhere stabs you in the back is this
for real or is this a signal error and
one way of like getting out the other
end of it is a vertical one have you
just had a gazillion rounds in common
with that person and things have gone
okay have you built with them out of the
this game but what you outline is
instead the horizontal one okay I
haven't had a gazillion rounds of this
game with them but we're also break
bread together and we also did this
together and we also have our cultural
share instead latal examples of iterated
games that you could build trust on
that's another way of solving it and the
virtual world collapses both of those so
what you wind up seeing when as soon as
you put in a signal error it could
collapse the entire system so people
then had to figure out how to evolve
protection against signal errors as soon
as there that's possible in your game
theory universe and what you have to
bring in is this radical like upending
notion of
forgiveness for should it be like
forgiveness automatically turning the
other cheek absolutely not it should be
based on your prior history and all
these algorithms of the more rounds in
the game you've gone in the past with
cooperation without the person doing
jerky something jerky the faster you
were willing to forgive them for what
seems to have been a Betrayal on their
part and possibly a signal error instead
and building up of trust building up of
social capital and of course what that
opens you up to is exactly what you
bring up which is a good sociopath knows
exactly how many inches they need to
push it and still get under this
umbrella of well that's a little bit
worrisome but forgivable forgivable at
that point when you have a reciprocal
system that's a wolf and sheep's
clothing a sociopath can exploit it like
mad but at least that was the way of
protecting yourself against that to some
extent build in you know a shared a
shared culture might actually be the
abstracted equivalent of a multi-
situational of like an abstracted multi-
situational game because like if I live
in your neighborhood let's say and I
don't know who you are but I know you
live in my neighborhood and nothing has
happened that's untoward in the 10 years
that we've been living near each other
then I can reasonably presume that
you're pretty much like all the other
people in my neighborhood including the
people I know because if you weren't you
would have caused trouble and so you
know you also talk in your book about
the fact that we have a proclivity to
demonize the foreign let's say right to
fail to differentiate the foreign into
the individual which is a better way of
thinking about it but one of the ways
that we probably circumvent that with
regards to Shared culture is that we
presume that people who are like us
which means they share our culture are
playing the same game as us and because
nothing has gone wrong when they've been
in the vicinity we can assume that
they're individuals rather than the
dragon of chaos itself let's say we can
extend to them the a prior luxury of
being individuated instead of being
treated like the Barbarian mob right and
so that's not that's not Prejudice
precisely it's just the extension of the
inclusion of a game into everybody who
shares our culture and and it would make
sense that thing the thing is the the
less someone is part of your culture
let's say the less abstracted evidence
you have that they're direct
participants in a reciprocal game rather
than stab you in the back Psychopaths
which they could be right because that's
about 3% of the population and maybe
higher under some circumstances so you
you also talk in your your your book
about something very interesting which
is something that's really puzzled me is
I've not been able to figure out how
honest cultures get a Toe Hold right
because as you point out that first of
all there's some evidence that the
default response of very immature
individuals two-year-olds let's say
isn't Cooperative two-year-olds are not
Cooperative they they are in some very
bounded circumstances but they can't
play shared games very well that doesn't
mature to until the age of three and so
it's sort of a Hoban landscape among
2-year-olds I know there's exceptions to
that but then as the brain matures then
the capacity for shared gam starts to
emerge right but the the fundamental
question is and you do point to this and
behave is well if you have a whole
society of cheaters and backstabbers
which is maybe the default Hoban
situation how the hell do you ever get a
Cooperative landscape started much less
a landscape where the default
response between strangers is honest and
trusting now you point out a little bit
you I think maybe what you were pointing
to in behave is the initiation of
lowrisk trading games like I read about
this jungle tribe I think it was in
South America and they initiated trade
with a foreign tribe on their Border in
the following manner they knew where the
territorial boundaries were just like
wolves know just like chimpanzees know
you know there's a rough Fringe and
Boundary that's sort of no man's land
they used to go there and leave some of
their arts and crafts or their tools
they just leave them on the ground and
then they'd Retreat knowing that the
other people were watching them and then
the other people would go and grab some
of these cool things and then the other
people being not completely dim would
leave some of their Trinkets and tools
lying on the ground and that's you know
kind of low cost they weren't going to
leave their most treasured possession to
begin with they leave something that's
sort of interesting but they yeah
exactly that exactly
that yeah yeah yeah so but but what's
cool is that that requires and you you
pointed this out that requires that
initial movement of Faith right you have
to presume the possibility of Humanity
on the other side then you have to take
a sacrificial risk and it can be small
you know not a stupid sacrificial risk
but a reasonable one and that can get
the ball rolling in a upward spoering
Cooperative Direction that's kind of
what kids do by the way when they come
together to start to initiate play when
they're about 3 years old they'll play a
real simple game to begin with you know
one that you could maybe play with a
one-year-old and then they ratchet up
the complexity of the game right to the
level where it's uh what would you call
maximizing their adaptive progress and
if they find a kid that they can do that
with then that kid becomes a friend and
that friend is recip Right reciprocal
iterative interactions so the Great and
that you you you've honed in on the
central question which is in a world in
which there's nothing but backstabbers
um how you jump started because if
somebody suddenly like stands up and
like recites the sermon from the
mountain and say I am going to start
cooperation everybody else is going to
say you know what a schmu and stab him
in the back after that and he will
forever be one step how do you jump
start it one of the ways that you point
out is the like tiny tiny incremental
upping of the
investment and the chance you're taking
another one like evolutionary biology
people love this founder populations
founder pop this is old population
ecology term a land bridge disappears a
something where you get a population
that gets
isolated they get cut off from the main
population and what happens over times
they get kind of inbred and thus you get
a lot of like Cooperative stuff built
around all being relatives and such and
they establish a high degree of
cooperation and then I don't know
whatever the landbridge comes back they
go back and they join the general
population and at that point they are
this cohort of Cooperators who have
figured out how to do reciprocity how to
do trust how to do all that stuff which
means they're a cluster of optimize tit
for tatters meaning they're going to out
compete everybody else until everybody
else signs up on now becoming good guys
okay so let let me ask you let me ask
you about that here so I got a
proposition for you this is relevant to
your speculations on the religious front
and I want to bring Sam Harris into this
too so I was reading for example I was
reading the book of Abraham because I'm
writing a book on biblical stories and
God promises Abraham that if he abides
by the central Covenant that his
descendants will outnumber everyone
else's
descendants and I have a sneaking
suspicion that that's a
narrativization that's a terrible word
it's a translation into story of the tit
forat reciprocal
altruistic Motif which is that if you
abide by this higher order sacrificial
principle and I'll return to that
sacrifice idea if you abide by this
higher order sacrificial principle all
things consider considered across the
longest possible span of time your
descendants will outcompete all other
descendants and one of the things that's
very cool about that story so when God
reveals this truth to Abraham who's
decided to act in a sacri proper
sacrificial manner right he's
sacrificing the present to the Future in
the optimized
manner then God says look don't be
thinking that this is going to be
straightforward because your descendants
are actually going to struggle for a
number of generations but if you can
hold out for the long run and it's four
generations in this particular story
then you can be certain that the pattern
of adaptation that you've chosen is
going to work well for you but also very
very well for your descendants and so
you know I know that Sam Harris who's
very concerned about the problem of evil
has been trying to ground a Transcendent
Morality In objective fact and I think I
can I can admire Sam's
Mo motivation and his concern with great
evils like the evils of the Holocaust
for example I think his attempt to
ground Morality In objective fact is
misdirected partly because I think a
much more fruitful place for an Endeavor
like that is actually in Game Theory
because there is something there right I
mean what we're basically pointing out
is that the structure of iterated
Interest there is a structure of
iterated interactions right there's an
emergent reality and as you said you
could model that with tit fortat
competitions in a computer landscape and
that turns out to be ecologically
generalizable so there's a there's an
actually
underlying ethos in iterated
interactions now you can imagine that as
the human imagination observed
interactions over vast stretches of time
it started to aggregate imaginative rep
represent representations of that ethos
and to extract it upward and it seems to
me that that would dovetail with the
maturation and domination of the
prefrontal cortex because what's
starting to happen is that you're using
long-term strategies to govern
short-term exigencies and that's a very
difficult thing to do because of course
the short-term sometimes screeches and
yells extraordinarily loudly but it but
part of what the religious Enterprise
seems to be doing as far as I can tell
is mapping this pattern of sacrifice of
the present to the Future and making the
proposition that that is the All Things
Considered that is the optimal adaptive
strategy so I don't know what you think
about those sorts of suppositions I I
think that's perfect I mean when you
look at like dopamine its role in
gratification postponement and dopamine
is anticipatory all of that this is the
whole literature built around Lab Rats
and lab monkeys and wow it works just
like in Us in terms of being able to
sustain behavior in anticipation of
reward isn't that amazing just like us
but we do it for an entire lifetime in
anticipation of the
afterlife like that's on a scale that's
very very human it has always struck me
like I I could not possibly be on
thinner ice getting into comparative
religion stuff here but it has always
struck me that the the sort of
Abraham and the Covenant and the people
of the sick with us and it's going to be
great you've got this dichotomy between
religions where something amazing has
happened and it's so amazing that you
just have to join and everything is
about
Recruitment and then you have the
religions that are about
retention because the reward is going to
be amazing if you stick it out with
us and like
traditional nomadic pastoralist
religions is about retention because you
get a big problem because you're
wandering all over the back of Beyond
because you're nomadic and passing all
these other tribes and maybe the grass
seems Greener with them so maybe it's a
good time to decide to sort of switch
over to those folks there stick with us
stick with us because it's going to be
amazing when the Lord finally comes
through with all his promises that's
like an
ecological adaptation to nomatic
pastoralism which is where the Old
Testament came from and what you also
get from that is and we're going to
throw in something extra so you can't
decide to like slip away at night and
become like a Canaanite or something
we're going to Mark you in a very
fundamental way that you could never
pass yourself off as one of them we're
going to invent circumcision so you
can't fake them out on that either you
better stick this retention retention
and there's a great reward coming and
everything about the New Testament is
something phenomenal happened there's
really good news and isn't this so cool
that you want to join us and I think the
whole like developing a frontal cortex
for it's going to come it's going to
come if you hold your breath yeah yeah Y
is much more a product of religions of
retention rather than religions of
recruitment yeah well that that that
bridge that you're drawing between the
Long View and dopaminergic function is
extremely interesting I I want to go
back to that part in your book because
you're pointing out that the
dopaminergic
system doesn't just signal reward it
signals the presence of what would you
say it signals that your theory that
reward is likely to occur under these
conditions is correct yeah right so it's
reinforcing what it's doing is actually
reinforcing the in the potency and
integrity of a predictive system that's
actually predicting positively and you
would want that
reinforced I'm curious about this issue
of sacrifice in relationship to cortical
maturation because one of the things
this is like a definition of maturity
you might say is that the more sure you
are the more you are able to foro
comparatively immediate gratification
for probably larger but deferred
gratification right so you start to tilt
in the direction of the future rather
than the present okay so in in the story
of Cain and Abel for example so Cain and
Abel are the first two human beings
right really because Adam and Eve are
made by God so forget about them C and
Abel are the first actual human beings
that's when work is invented right
because sacrifice and work are the same
thing when you work you're not doing
what you want to in the moment when you
work what you're doing is not doing what
you want to in the moment so that the
future will be better or so that your
family can Thrive right it's deferred
and so and social it's deferred and
communal it's like the definition of
work and then the idea is that if you
work properly whatever that means and
that's what able do then your sacrifices
are going to be rewarded by God whereas
if you hold back back and you take the
psychopath route and you pretend then
you're going to be deeply punished but
the fundamental issue there and this is
the question that I have for you is that
it seems to me that there's a very tight
relationship between the insistence that
sacrifice is
necessary and maturation and the
emergence of the prefrontal cortex as a
a deferred as a predictor of deferred
future reward out of the landscapist
established by the say the lyic system
that's much more concerned with
immediate gratification so it's sacrific
compared to immediate gratification and
then there's a discussion of what
constitutes proper
sacrifice exactly and that's where like
you you you study dopamine
neurochemistry and this receptor subtype
of the dopamine receptor blah blah all
of that and when you really look at the
system what you have to come away with
is we humans have the exact same
neurochemical system as every animal out
there and we have a totally
unrecognizably different one because we
mobilize the same damn molecule and the
same like mesolimbic cortical Pathways
and we do it so that our great grandkids
will have a better planet and we do it
for an after like we do it on a well do
you think there's any difference between
that and the idea of an afterlife like I
mean if I'm thinking six Generations
into the future why wouldn't that be
represented symbolically as something
like an afterlife because it is an
afterlife I'm dead and if if I'm trying
to conduct my behavior in a manner
that's so moral that it's actually
echoing properly a thousand years into
the future I don't really see any
difference between
that practically speaking in my
conception that my behavior should be
governed by something like infinite
regard for the potential future I mean
It's Tricky right because you have to
Discount the future to some degree to
survive but all things considered you're
still trying to set up a situation where
your behavior in the present maximizes
the utility of your behavior across all
possible iterations out into the
future and as soon as you allow for the
possibility of like your Footprints
lasing longer than your
lifespan this is a whole new ball game
either in the form of there's an
afterlife or in the form of I want to
leave a planet for my great great
grandchildren that's going to be a more
peaceful wonderful one or even in the
form of like every time you sit at like
a a typical funeral where everybody's
going through the usual eulogies of like
distortedly amplifying the the good
traits of someone and ignoring the bad
what's going through your head is how do
I want to be
remembered whoa that's a whole other
world of like what you're doing now the
footprints you leave after you are going
to matter and like all the versions We
have we would like to than the students
we train we would like to think people
300 years from now we to think we've
composed the most amazing like mass and
B minor and that's satisfying yeah we've
invented a whole weird world of being
able to have anticipatory motivation
built around stuff that's going to last
longer than us and in some ways you
could be like a Paul Erick and think
about what's going to happen to the
planet in the century from populations
or you could think about the afterlife
or you but any of these are like
radically human
domains that's that extension of
knowledge of of of knowledge out
indefinitely into the future right which
is something that that seems to
characterize human beings and that might
also be a consequence of cortical
expansion right the the discovery of
that infinite future yeah yeah and so
okay so so let me ask you a question let
me ask you a question about that too
yes I'm not exactly clear I've spent a
fair bit of time studying the
dopaminergic system and its relationship
to reward and reinforcement but I wasn't
as clear as I would like to be about the
role of dopamine in anticipation of
future reward and I like I said I read
that in your book and I started to
understand it but I don't completely
understand it and so now dopamine will
signal if you lay out a structure of
behavior and that structure of behavior
produces the desired outcome you get a
dopamine kick that feels good which is
sort of the generalized element but the
dopamine also preferentially encourages
the neural structures that were active
in the sequencing of that behavior to
grow and flourish and that's the
distinction between reward and
reinforcement but you talk about
anticipation and I know I'm missing
something there so will you walk me
through in a little bit more detail how
the dopamine system works in
relationships specifically to
anticipation of the future rather than
just responding say to successful
Behavior so you know unpacking this a
bit exactly what you were referring to
like take a rat take a monkey take a
college freshman and psych 101 whatever
and give them a totally unexpected
reward from out of nowhere and you can
show that there's activation of
dopaminergic reward Pathways in the lyic
system and you can do that with
functional Imaging you could do that
with something invasive with your blab
animal whatever okay dopamine's about
reward it's completely about reward give
somebody cocaine and they will release
more dopamine than any vertebrate in all
of history has ever been able to do and
yeah it's about reward until you then
get a little bit more subtle with your
Paradigm and now you take that you know
human rat monkey and put them in a
setting where you've trained them in a
contingency a little light comes on
which means now if they go over to this
lever and hit the lever 10 times they'll
then get a reward signal work reward
signal work reward and as soon as
they've learned it when does dopamine go
up and what we think we just learned the
first example is when you get the reward
not at all it goes up when the signal
turns on because that's you sitting
there saying I know how this works I
know how that lights me I'm I'm on top
of this I know that lever pressing I'm
really good at it I'm in I'm in familiar
territory exactly and I have agency and
this is going to be great it's about the
anticipation so why I have agent why why
use that phrase because that's very
interesting right because agency implies
that well it implies now that you're
Master of the situation right is that
you you said you're on top of it it so
is it the signaling that you're in it
it's got to be something like the
signaling in a domain the signaling that
you're now in a domain where your
behavioral competences are matched to
the environmental demands right and that
would be on being that's like being on
sacred ground in a very very fundamental
sense right because you know what to do
there and it seems L logical and then
you see this gigantic piece of
vulnerability and illogic in the system
okay so the light comes on dopamine goes
up it's about anticipation really
significantly if you block the dopamine
rise you don't get the lever pressing
it's not just about anticipation it's
about the work you're willing to do
driven by the anticipation so that's
motivation that's go directed behavior
all of that now you throw in this extra
wrinkle like well we've been talking
about are circumstances the light comes
on you do the work you get the reward
you do the work you get the reward 100%
predictability and you have complete
sense of Master and agency over it now
the grad student switches things to you
do the work you press the lever you do
the work on that and you get the reward
only 50% of the time it's not guaranteed
and beautiful work this I wolf from
Schultz at Cambridge who like pioneered
all of this showing at that point as
soon as the buzzer the light comes on
signaling it's one of those
circumstances again you get a much
bigger rise of dopamine than you got
before why now let me ask you about okay
so let me ask you about that so what
that seems to me to indicate is that
you've now entered an environment where
that's quasi predictable but now there's
novelty and the advantage to having the
dopamine signal kick in when novelty
makes itself manifest is that it signals
that there's also more to be learned
here through exploration that might
signal extreme future reward if you can
just map the territory properly right
because it's good to have a good thing
but it's even better to have a
potentially better thing and Novelty
does contain is that is that what's
happening that's exactly it the most
proximal thing that's going on in your
head when suddenly dopamine goes 10
times higher is you've just introduced
this word word into the neurochemistry
you've introduced the word maybe and
right maybe is intermittent re you know
that's incredible yeah yeah yeah and
what's always between the lines with
maybe is exactly what you're outlining
um if I keep pressing the lever I'm
gonna figure out what the maybe is about
and be able to
turn I'm G to master this I'll be the
new master of a new territory then
exactly and the longer they can dangle
the maybe in front of you and the more
they can manipulate you into thinking
that what feels like a 50% chance of
getting reward in reality it's on tenth
of a thousandth perc chance but they
understand your Psy sufficiently so
that's intermittent partial
reinforcement and that's why it grips
you because it falsely signals it right
it falsely signals novelty treasure and
you can manipulate that now you you
pointed out something extremely
dangerous in your book right because I'd
thought about this in terms of building
the ultimately addictive slot machine
you showed that if you're playing a slot
machine and the and the Tumblers line up
almost line up two out of three or four
out of five then you're much more likely
to get a dopamine kick so you could
imagine a digital slot machine where you
have multiple tumblers where you code it
to the player so that the machine knows
that it's the same player playing and
that that the proportion of almost lined
up tumblers increases with game play so
then you'd have intermittent partial
reinforcement combined with a novelty
indicator that indicated that you were
obtaining ma false Mastery over the damn
game God you'd have old people glued to
that nonstop because as soon as you
switch from just going with maybe
incredibly powerful though that is you
switch over to
almost yeah right almost almost
and yeah do that like asymptotically and
people will press lever press till like
they die of starvation at their slot
machine in Las Vegas Right comes over
and feeds them for free yeah right not
okay and so and so so as far as you're
concerned so that's so cool so imagine
that so I was thinking mythological
terms too because so there's a hero
element that's emerging there because
the hero in mythology is the person who
goes into unknown territory and Masters
it right and the hero is a
broad symbol character because the hero
isn't just the person who goes into
unknown territory Masters it but also
gains what's there and then distributes
it reciprocally that's the whole hero
mythology essentially and so your point
is that the dopamine system kicks in in
part as a consequence of
predictability so that shows that you
know what you're doing when you're in a
place that's going to give you rewards
so you're in a garden that's fruitful
but it's even better if there's an
intermittent element of the
reinforcement because it shows you that
there's fruit there that you have left
to discover and if you go down that
pathway you're going to be hyper
motivated to go down that pathway so you
want to be in a garden you want to be in
a garden where there's fruit but where
the possibility of more fruit beckons
and where that possibility is dependent
on the morality and what would you call
it daring of your actions now I would
say that that pattern if someone if a
female is observing that pattern of
interaction in a male that male is going
to be maximally reproductively
attractive well I think that probably
depends on what species we're talking
about just to become as oh sorry meant
people I meant human beings okay so just
to be a pain and now come back and say
well I think that probably also depends
on the culture and but but yes and that
is heroism that's I mean
path of the hero is they have
setbacks you press the lever 10 times
and you don't get the food pellet and
what the dopamine system is about is
then saying I'm G to press the lever
twice as much 10 times as much more
fervently I'm gonna cross my toes I'm
gonna wear my lucky socks and underwear
I'm gonna CH you know ritualistic
whatever of Orthodoxy because I'm
willing to come back and try even harder
and then you surmount your setback and
that's your path of the hero and you
know that's that's what dopamine is
doing there that's why that's why you
don't give up at the first setback and
that's why ultimately getting a reward
predictably every single time you press
the lever gets boring after a while and
gets yeah well it shows you that there's
there's nothing left to discover it's
that so that's interesting interesting
so because imagine if the optimal Garden
is one that's fruitful but where the
possibility of more future fruit also
lurks then when it's reduced to merely
being fruitful there's an element of it
that's
dull right because there's no more
future Poss there is predictability and
and that's fine it's it's better than
privation but it's not as good as an
infinite landscape of future possibility
right right so so you know doeski oh so
go ahead if in addition not only do
sticking it out get you more Mastery and
eventually almost becomes definite and
all that but if also you're set up so
that your sense of self becomes more
solidified because you're sticking with
it because you're your metaphorical
ability to look at yourself in the
mirror and all if that's an added layer
of what you've been like acculturated
into whoa that's that yeah yeah you bet
that hey so there's an analogy there
there's an analogy there with with what
you might describe as the the what the
what would you say the admirability of
fair play so imagine that you have a son
who's playing a hockey game or a soccer
game and he's like he's the star but
then when he scores a goal he celebrates
a little too narciss statistically and
he Hogs the ball on the field right and
then if his players his fellow players
make a mistake he gets pissed off and
has a little tantrum and you take him
off the field and you say look
kid you know it doesn't matter whether
you win or lose it matters how you play
the game and he says what the hell do
you mean I'm clearly the best player on
the team if people send me the ball I
score we win I'm not passing the ball to
these losers because then we lose um
what the hell are you talking about Dad
and you don't know what to say but what
you should say is look kid the reason it
doesn't matter whether you win or lose
but how you play the game is because
life is a sequence of NeverEnding
multiple games and you're a winner if
people want to play with you and if
you're a little prick when you win any
given game and when you if you whine and
complain because you've lost even if
you're an expert at that game no one's
going to want to play with you and
you're a loser right and that's I think
that's analgous to I think it's analgous
in a very profound sense to that
prefrontal maturation that puts the
future above the present but I also
think it's analogous in a deep way to
the pattern of behavior that we talked
about and I don't know exactly why this
is but I know it's there somewhere
that's characterized by this wanting to
be in the place where future reward
beckons as well as present reward you
know those things are going to stack
they have to stack on top of each other
right because otherwise there's going to
be an intrinsic contradiction in the
ethic so there has to be a a ordance
between that fair play ethos and that
exploratory ethos maybe it is maybe
that's in play right if you're a good
player and you're out there on the field
you're not just trying to score the goal
you're also trying to play with various
ways of scoring the goal you're playing
with your teammates and so maybe it's in
that play that you optimize exploration
Plus reward seeking at the same time and
you do that communally and maybe that's
signaled by the system of You Know Jack
PP the other thing he did that's so damn
cool is Pep outlined the neuros
circuitry of play he was the first
scientist to do that to show that
there's actually a separate circuit in
mammals for play and
so and it's not exploration exactly
right it's not it's not exactly the same
circuit that mediates exploration but
it's allied with it so I don't know how
that fits into dopaminergic
reinforcement but I know that play is
intrinsically reinforcing so well s two
two threads from obviously completely
different universes of showing the power
of this exactly the point you bring up
um which is in multiple games and
multiple players in formal Game Theory
like you you choose you you Foster
cooperation if there's thirdparty
punishment if you can right for being
third party punish all these different
layers but one of the things that really
really chooses and selects for
cooperation
is if people have the option to opt out
of playing with you yeah yeah that's
freedom of Association man that's why
that's a fundamental Freedom exactly and
every mother is a good game theorist in
that regard when she's saying if you do
that you won't have any friends like
that's
incredibly like that's one of the best
lessons your dopamine system can get
either from The Game Theory end or from
your mother that the long-term goals
look very different when you're
simultaneously involved in um teen
different games at once with very
different time coures well that's also
relevant to that bat story you told a
because one of the things I've been
thinking about too so there's a gospel
phrase that says that you should store
up your treasure in heaven and not where
rust and and moths and so forth can
corrupt it on Earth and so and here's
what it means as far as I can tell and I
want you to tell me what you think about
this in light of our conversation so the
the bat that has the pouch full of blood
has that blood right then and there and
that's a form of treasure now the
problem with that blood is that it's
it's a finite resource and hunting which
is what the bats are doing is um
sporadically successful so even if
you're a great Hunter and this is true
with hunter gatherer tribes for human
beings even if you're the best hunter
you're going to fail a fair bit of time
when you're out especially if you're on
your own hunting is collective and your
success is is erratic so even if you're
a great hunter then you might say well
what would make you the best of all
possible Hunters as far as your family
was concerned and that wouldn't be your
skill at hunting it would be your skill
at Distributing the fruits of your
hunting among the other Hunters so
they're so godamn thrilled with what a
wonderful guy you are that every time
they hunt you get some food for your
family and so what you do is you store
your treasure in your reputation and
your reputation is actually the open
book record of your reciprocal
interactions across hunts right so you
know the the go go ahead open book
that's a small community if you're the
one who hangs back and pretends to have
to tie your shoes right at the scariest
part of the mammoth hunt they're going
to know about it people are going to be
talking about it over the far open book
and like the agricultural transition
human industrial one of the biggest
consequences is you can have Anonymous
interactions you lose all the open
book uh conforming and and forcing of
reciprocity because Anonymous you can
get away with it but in like a setting
like that that's absolutely the
constraining thing and you know what
what's what's the term the best among
hunter gatherers the insurance is
somebody else having a full stomach yeah
right precisely precisely well then you
use well so then you use other people's
bodies as your bank of future food but
even more abstractly it isn't even their
bodies it's their mental representation
of you as a reciprocal player and so if
that's associated with imagine that's
that's a reputation so that's actually
rep associated with your ethos and with
the tracking of that ethos and if that
ethos is something like generous
long-term oriented sacrificial player of
multiple reciprocal games then all of a
sudden you're protected against the
exigencies of Fate because even if
there's local failure in the food supply
people are so thrilled about your
generous reciprocity that you're going
to be provisioned even under the worst
of all possible circumstances so you
know those uh those economic exchange
games where you where you identify two
people you say look you're going to give
this person sum of $100 but they can
reject the offer if they don't believe
it's fair you play those cross
culturally and the typical offer is $50
right it's it's about 5050 but you know
I've wondered too if if the best offer
isn't 60 especially if you're doing it
in front of a crowd because if you
imagine you Weir and the best graduate
supervisors do this by the way if you
air continuously slightly on the side of
generosity then my suspicions are is the
acre long-term reciprocal reward of that
would pay off better than just a 5050
Arrangement right and you could maybe
see that with your yeah yeah exactly
that well I think you see that with your
wife too right is maybe you want to
treat the people around you slightly
better on average than they treat you
because that way you're you're doing
this you're making the the whole pie
expand and including your own reputation
then you get some interesting cultural
stuff comes in because they've done all
sorts of crosscultural studies of like
ultimatum game play and and all of that
and see tremendous cultural differences
in whether it's 5050 514
9010 then you see there's a handful of
cultures out there where you get
punishment of
generosity somebody makes this viewed as
an overly generous offer and you punish
them for it oh my God what is that about
and that's this like
pathological sort of Retribution sort of
thing you're punishing them because if
they get away with being generous like
that people are going to start expecting
you to do this yeah yeah yeah I see that
in families that are pathological all
the time if someone makes a positive
gesture they'll get punished to death
because of what that implies for the
potential future behavor of all the
other miscreant and what are those
cultures like some of the ones where
like God help you if you wind up being
part of one of those ex Eastern block
countries have the high R of this this
paradoxical punishment for generosity oh
this guy's just G to make us look good
and then everybody's whoa that is a
troubled
Society well that's that's a vision of
hell that's for sure where you're
punished for that's what n said about
punishment it's so such a brilliant line
he said and it was look if you're
punished for breaking a rule there's
actually a form of relief in that a
because when you're punished for
breaking a rule that validates the
entire rule system and that's what used
to predict the world so there's a relief
in being justly punished so what n
pointed out was if you really want to
punish someone you wait till they do
something virtuous and they punish them
for that right and that's a good
definition of hell hell is the place
where people are punished for doing
what's truly virtuous yeah and you like
you said you don't want to be in a
society like that that's that's as maybe
that's not as bad as it gets because
things can get pretty bad but it's
pretty bad well that that's a pretty
good predictor of societies with
Incredible rates of child bullying and
spousal abuse and substance abuse and
Social Capital that's gone down the
drain and that's what those cultures
alike um yeah that's a pretty bad World
in which generosity is is explicitly an
enthusiastically punished by the like
crowd of Yahoo peasants who arve to like
Forks at that point yeah you know one of
the things that I've talked to my
clinical clients about and my family
members too and a little bit more
broadly lecturing maybe it has to do
with this initiation of an expanding and
abundant tit fortat reciprocity is that
like if you're really Alert in your
local
environment you can see people around
you playing with the edge of additional
generosity so they'll people will make
these little offerings that's a good way
of thinking about it where they just go
out of their way a little bit in a sort
of secretive manner you know they'll
sort of sneak it it's like a it's like a
student who writes you an essay and
dares to sneak in one original thought
just to see what the hell happens you
know but if you jump on that and you
notice and you reward people for staying
on that edge where they're being a
little more generous and productive than
they usually are you can encourage
people around you to get to be just
doing that like mad and they like you a
lot for it too because actually people
are extremely happy when they're noticed
for doing something that puts them on
the edge of that generous
expansiveness and then rewarded for it
so even if you're in a society that
punishes that you can actually act as an
individual to differentially reward it
that's what a good Mentor does and it's
always a cost benefit analysis of how
much am I willing to incrementally risk
to start R things even further that
that's exactly it one one of the
most like fascinating wrinkles in it in
terms of like accounting for like the
world's miseries and stuff is when you
think about like dopamine what are what
are the things we anticipate well if
you're a baboon and I spent like 33
years of my life studying baboons in the
wild during Summers if you're a baboon
your your world of of pleasures and
anticipation are pretty narrow like you
get something to eat that you want you
get to mate with someone that you want
or you're in a bad mood and there's
somebody smaller and weaker who you
could like take out on with the impunity
like that's basically the realm of
Pleasures for a
baboon and then you get to us and we
have all that but we also have like
liking sonnets and we also have taking
cocaine and we also have solving Fat's
Last Theorem and we also
have you know we've got this
ridiculously wide range of Pleasures
like we can we're the species that could
both secrete dopa do amine in response
to cocaine or winning the lottery or
multiple orgasms and also secrete
dopamine in response to smelling the
first great flour in
Spring and it's the same dopamine
neurons in all those cases and what that
means is we have to have a dopamine
system that can reset incredibly quickly
because some of the time going from zero
to 10 on the dial is you've just gone
from no nice flower smell to nice flower
smell and some of the time going from
zero to 10 is you've just like conquered
your enemies and gone over the Alps with
your Elephants or something and this is
fabulous we have to constantly being
able to reset the gain on our doem well
you all you point to something else
there that's really cool too is that so
now you could imagine a garden that has
fruit in it and then you could imagine a
garden that could even have more fruit
in it but then you could imagine
refining your taste so that you can now
learn to take pleasure in things that
wouldn't have given you pleasure before
that's what artists do e is they offer
people a differentiated taste so you
know if if you think of a landscape
painting it's like there are certain
visual scenes now that we regard as
canonically beautiful but it's virtually
certain I mean I know there's an
evolutionary basis to that to some agree
but it's virtually certain that our
taste for beauty is at least in part
informed by the brilliant Geniuses of
the past who were able to differentiate
the world more and more carefully and
say look here's an act here's actually a
new source of reward right people do
that when they invent a new musical
genre or a new form of dance is right so
not only can we multiply the rewards
indefinitely if we're pursuing the
proper pathway but we can differentiate
the landscape of potential
rewards I would say virtually
indefinitely now that would be part of
that prefrontal flexibility that can
modify our underlying lyic responses too
even though we're you know running down
the same dopaminergic trackways let's
say that the poor baboons run down which
is totally cool and so human and all but
has like this massive tragic
implication which is the only way you
could use the same dopamine neurons and
same dopamine range from zero to maxing
out for like both H and like Lottery is
the system resets it's got to keep
resetting as to what the scale is what
the gain is on the system what that
means is it constantly resets it
constantly
habituates and what that means is like
the most tragic like thing about the
human predicament whatever was a great
unexpected reward yet
yesterday is going to feel like what
you're entitled to
today and is going to feel insufficient
tomorrow so dovi in in in Notes from
Underground he wrote a one of the
world's most compelling critiques of
what would you call it satiating
utopianism so dovi said essentially if
you gave people everything they wanted
nothing to do but eat cakes lie around
in pools of warm water and busy
themselves with the continuation of the
species so sort of Ideal baboon life
that people would purposefully
eventually purposefully rise up and just
smash all that to hell just so something
interesting would happen because that's
the sort of crazy creatures we are but
you know you said that's a tragedy and
you can understand that right because it
means that today's satiation is
tomorrow's unhappiness but by the same
token it's also the enabling
precondition condition for the impetus
to discover new Landscapes of reward and
new forms of reward right because if you
didn't habituate to what you already had
you'd well I think you'd fall into a
kind of infantile satiation and maybe
you'd just fall asleep right because if
you're completely this is the difference
between satiation and incentive reward
if you're satiated then you just fall
asleep Consciousness isn't for satiation
Consciousness is for expansion something
like expansive exploration if we didn't
habituate to reward we would just
satiate and then we wouldn't need to be
conscious it's something like that I
mean this this is a huge like uh half
full half empty thing um we're the
species that's always
hungry
because yesterday's excitement is not
enough tomorrow and that means it's
never going to be enough and we're the
species
that yearns in that way and is never
satisfied and thus among other things
were the species that then
invents you know technology and poetry
and and the m and wheels and fire and
everything yeah
it's like it's this double leg okay so
so but I'm going to go back to this
abrahamic story because it's very
interesting in this regard right we
talked about it already in relationship
to the possibility of a particular ethos
coming to dominate an evolutionary
landscape but something very interesting
happens at the beginning of the
abrahamic story and Abraham is the
father of Nations so this is a good
classic narrative example so Abraham is
actually fully satiated at the beginning
of that story because he's like 75 and
he has Rich parents and all he's done
his whole life is like laying the
hammock and eat peeled grapes and like
he has everything he he needs absolutely
everything and then this voice comes to
him and says this isn't what you're
built for you should get the hell out
there in the world right and Abraham
hearkens to that voice so to speak he
leaves his satiated surrounding and he
goes out into the world and actually
what happens is quite catastrophic it's
certainly not it's not a simple comedy
the story because he encounters War war
and famine and the an Egyptian tyranny
and The Aristocrats conspire to steal
his wife and he has to SAC he's called
upon by God to sacrifice his only son
it's like it's quite the bloody
catastrophe but the idea in the story is
that the path of maximal Adventure is
better than the path of infantile
satiation and so you might say human
beings are eternally dissatisfied I mean
that's one way of looking at it or you
could saywell there's an abstract form
of meta satiation let's put it that way
that's the same as being on it's like a
Blood Hound being on the trail it's the
pleasure of the hunt it's the pleasure
of the adventure it's the pleasure of
that forward seeking right and I like to
think about it like Copus you know
except that what Copus is doing is
pushing a sequence of ever larger
Boulders up a sequence of ever higher
mountains it's not the same it's you
know it's this continual movement upward
to Ward some unspecified positive goal
and then the ultimate satiation isn't
the top of any of those mountains it's
the sequential journey across that
sequence of Peaks and I I I suspect
that's what that dopamine system is
actually signaling when it's that would
make sense with regards to anticipation
it's it's the happiness of
pursuit rather than the other way around
and that's
incredibly addictive in that regard
um you know you you can't get rats in a
normative social environment addicted to
cocaine you have to put them in a you
have to isolate them in a cage so if you
have a rat that's going about his rat
business you know he's got his rat
friends and his rat family in his rat
Adventures he won't succumb to cocaine
like an isolated rat in a cage so one of
the things that's also worth
contemplating and this is relevant to to
your last book and maybe your next one
is that cuz you're looking for a
solution to something like the human
propensity for violence you know you
might say well if we're not on the true
adventure of our life which would be
signaled by Optimal dopaminergic
function let's say then we're going to
look for all sorts of false adventures
and some of those false Adventures are
going to be addictive and some of them
are going to be downright pathological
you know you talked about the baboons
who take pleasure in Pounding the hell
out of this you know the the weak guy
that's sitting beside him it's like if
you're not on the track with your nose
to the ground optimizing the firing of
those exploratory and playful dopam
energic circuits you're going to be
searching everywhere for a false
adventure and that can come in all sorts
of pathological forms and often like one
of the falsest ones is getting what you
were yearning
for yeah right in terms of that I why
why do you say that why do you say that
why did that come to mind
because
like may may may you live in interesting
times like right but one of the greatest
curses you can place on someone is to
give them precisely what they've always
thought they
wanted and yeah things get a little more
nuanced than that and they're I I I love
Bor B stories um his won the Immortals
where off going through this traveler
journeyer going through the deserts and
the jungles and all of that searching
for this Mythic tribe of Immortals and
he eventually finds them because they
found this river that you drink from it
and you're Immortal and they've been
Immortal and how cool is that and
they're perpetually on the move because
what they're doing is they're now
looking for the Fable river that will
give them
mortality immortality turned out to be a
total drag and they're going out of
their with how pointless this all is so
this is their new Quest because it turns
out like what they wanted wasn't quite
what they really wanted well you know
there's an old Jewish story about God
it's a cone it's like a Zen cone except
it was the ancient Jews that came up
with it
um what does The God Who is omniscient
omnipresent and omnipotent
lack and the answer is
limitation yeah and so one of the one of
the the cories of that is God and manner
in a sense twins is that the absolute
lacks limitation and so for there to be
totality the absolute has to be paired
with limitation and that's because
limitation has advantages it's very
paradoxical a that limitation has
advantages that totality lacks and you
can see that even in the creativity
literature because the creativity
literature shows quite clearly that
creativity is enhanced by the placing of
arbitrary limitations like there's a
there's a there's an archive online this
is very funny there's an archive online
of
Hau that's donated devoted to nothing
but the lunch and meet spam there's like
50,000 haikus written about spam I think
the of course MIT Engineers set this up
because of course they would but it's
such a comical example because it shows
you that paradoxically when you impose
limitations and that might even include
the limitations of mortality that you
produce a plethora of creative
consequences emerging out of that and it
isn't obvious and this is what you were
pointing to it isn't obvious that if you
transcended that absolutely that you
would be better rather than worse off I
mean it's a tricky question because
we're always looking to be healthier and
to live longer and no wonder but but
there is something to be said for
limitation and the fact that you have to
transcend that in an adventurous manner
right it gives you maybe life is the
game that a particularly daring God
would play you know because it has an
infinite cost that's death and God only
knows what that enables at the same time
it constrains I mean so what's it like
working with baboons sir I mean they
they seem like a particularly dismal
primate species so what what's it been
like spending the time out there in the
baking sun watching these like pretty
brutal animals go at each other for 30
years
there's they're perfect they're perfect
for what I study my my sort of roots as
a scientist was as a stress physiologist
and yeah kind to understand what stress
does to the brain not good things what
does stress do to vulnerability to
mental illness not good things what does
stress do to your body all sorts of
stuff what do it depends on who you are
in your society and social Rank and all
of that um so in my lab I spent forever
studying the effects of stress on
molecular biology of neuron death and
all that but out in the field it was
okay trying to make sense of these
baboons who's got the rotten blood
pressure who's got the bad cholesterol
levels who's got the immune system that
isn't working very what does it have to
do with their Rank and patterns of
social stress and patterns of
affiliation and basically health psych B
um and why them they were the perfect
species to study because they're out on
the Serengeti which was my field site um
which is an amazing ecosystem like if
you're a baboon you live in these
through 50 to 100 animals or so out in
the savannah um Nobody messes with them
once once a year a lion picks off
someone most of the time you can't touch
them with that um infant mortality is
lower than among the neighboring humans
and you only spend three four hours a
day doing your day's foraging what that
means is you've got like8 n hours of
free time every day to devote to
generating psychological stress for
everybody else they're exactly like us
none of us get ulcers because we're like
fighting for canned food items and
bombed out souit netw works we have this
luxury of generating psychosocial stress
because we're westernized privileged
humans and baboons are one of the only
other models out there because they've
got n of free time every day and if
you're a baboon and you're miserable
it's because another baboon has worked
very intentionally to bring that about
they're all about psychosocial stress
they're like bloody and tooth and Claw
has nothing to do with them it's all
their chest like awful to each other
they're perfect models for westernized
psychosocial stress so they're not nice
guys like I I have I did not grow to
love a whole lot of them over the
decades but wow they're maavan
backstabbing and all their their highest
calling in life is to make some other
baboon
miserable right right so communal
Psychopaths so so you did point out in
in in in in your book
that you studied a baboon troop where
there where because of a a historical
accident there was a plethora of
females and then that took a lot of the
competition stress away from the males
and they actually started to become more
civilized and so I have two questions
about that it's like why did the baboons
take the psychopathic prick route on The
evolutionary Highway
and what does the fact that that even
what does the fact that that's
modifiable it's quite strange really you
know that it's
modifiable what does that have to say
let's say about free choice in the
baboon world whether or not it's
necessary to organize your whole society
on on the grounds of you know tit fortat
psychopathy it tells you it takes some
pretty special unique circumstances to
jumpstart all the barriers to
cooperation um right right looking at
okay you can have one person who's
willing to gamble an iny bit of
vulnerability to see if somebody
reciprocates or you can have a Founder
Effect of an inbred cooperating group or
you can have you know a whole bunch of
ways of of jump starting it um but then
you get a totally
quirky unpredictable event which was the
thing that happened with my baboon troop
this was a a troop my wife and I studied
for years and they had an
ecological unprecedented disaster thing
that happened at one point there was
outbreak of
tuberculosis not among my baboons but
among the neighboring baboons one one
troop over a troop that was living off
of the garbage dump at a tourist
launch and which is where the tubercular
it was tubercular meat coming from the
tourist LA and tuberculosis you know it
takes Thomas M would have enough time to
write hundreds of pages of a novel
before TB kills somebody TB kills a
non-human primate in a couple of weeks
weeks it's like it's a wild fire in
terms of how destructive it is um so you
had this neighboring Troop that had you
know Pig Heaven they had this garbage
dump from a tourist launch and every day
a tractor came and dumped all the like
leftover desserts and stuff from the
tourist dinners and banquets so they
were living off of that I actually did
some studies on that frop and showed
they got the star and metabolic syndrome
they got elevated tries they got
borderline diabetes like yeah like us
the same but they had better infant
survival um the same pluses and minuses
of like a westernized overly indulgent
diet but they had the greatest spot on
earth and every morning a subset of my
guys would go over there to try to get
the food would go over there and have to
fight their way in in this like twice as
many Resident males there who are pissed
at who's this Outsider coming in here
these were only the most aggressive
males in my troop who were willing to go
and spend their mornings trying to fight
for the garbage next door in addition in
the morning is when baboom do most of
their like affiliative socializing
sitting there grooming each other these
are guys who not only were willing to
fight for food but it was a much higher
priority to them when sitting around and
grooming somebody and being nice right
right right socially affiliate
and they were the most aggressive so
they're the ones who wound up getting
killed by the TB it wiped out about half
the males and it wasn't the high ranking
50% it was the most aggressive jerky
least socialized 50% which some of them
were high ranking but some of them were
like hyper androgenic jerky adolescent
males who were like spending all day
starting fights they couldn't finish it
wasn't just a rank thing you didn't lose
the dominant 50 right you lost the 50%
with the aggressive unsocialized
personalities and that left like a
completely different cohort of males it
left you twice as many females as males
for one thing which you don't normally
see in a baboon troop so all these
females who suddenly had a whole lot to
gain from not having baboons be male
baboons be the jerky displacing
aggression that characterizes them where
they're in a bad mood and if you're
small or female watch out but most of
all the guys who were left were nice
guys they were socially
Affiliated they didn't take it out on
someone smaller they still competed for
rank but they weren't displacing
aggression on innocent bystanders at
anywhere near the rate and this brought
in an entire new culture into the troop
which was great and totally amazing and
Isn't that cool
and what was also cool with stress
hormone levels which is what I was able
to studying these guys way down in them
and their immune systems were working
better yay baboon Utopia all of that so
at that point like sort of reality
intervened and I couldn't look at that
troop for about a decade
um game Park politics or whatever but a
decade later I was finally able to get
back to this troop and it was the same
culture the same wonderful culture wow
wow wow not every one of those well so
that's another that's another example in
principle of how cooperation could
initiate right is that you could have a
a circumstance at one point where the
real Pricks get wiped out for for some
somewhat random reasons and then you get
a Cooperative Community starting you
know I've also read I don't remember who
wrote about this who suggested that over
time human beings we really domesticated
ourselves by using using third party
enforcers to wipe out most of the
psychopathic males and that also might
have been a contributor to the
initiation of something like a
Cooperative tit fortat reciprocating
Community exactly and long before we
figured out that you pay third- Party
enforcers by hiring them as police or
something third party enforcers gain
Prestige and Trust in GRE conspicuously
that's that's the payoff for it but the
thing that was most remarkable there is
uh baboons male baboons grow up
obviously in their home troop and around
puberty they get totally itchy and they
get ants in the pants and they pick up
and they transfer to their adult trop
which could be next door her could be 60
miles away they wind up being this like
sniffly little parasite riddle kid who
shows up five years of working their way
up the ranks and all of that and so it's
this transfer business business a decade
later when going back to look at this
troop all of the males who were there at
the time of the TB outbreak and survived
it because of their personality they had
long since died all of the adult males
were ones who had joined the troop since
then as
adolescence they had joined in and and
they were still civilized they had
learned we don't do stuff here like that
wow that's amazing that's really amazing
cultural transmission and what became
like so damn interesting to look at is
how were they doing it how were they
transmitting this
culture and the best we were able to
figure out it wasn't observational it
wasn't that like these new horrible kids
show up and they just watch all these
other like male baboom being nice
because there's zero evidence for
observational learning of any sort of
cultural transmission of stuff like that
who whoever discovers that is going to
be the like the king of non-human
culture stuff so it wasn't that so then
you wonder if there's self- selection um
like it's only the nice guys who
transfer into that troop the males
typically they spend a few months they
check out this troop they check out that
one maybe it was self- selective I
always call this the well who would
choose to go to Reed College model
right it's the hippie it's the hippie
baboons yeah but as it turned out when
these new guys joined the troop they
were just as aggressive and displacing
of like adolescence as adolescent
showing up in any other troop they were
it was not self- selection um and what
it was was males males adult males were
not dumping on females anywhere near as
much as in the normal tro as a result
female were much less dressed and their
hormone levels showed this as a result
females were much more willing to chance
a pro-social interaction reaching out to
someone than they would have been in a
normal fruit because the OD wow L and
what you saw was in the typical troop it
would be 70 to 80 days before one of
these new transfer males would be
groomed by a female in this troop is
that equivalent to offering a fruit yes
and this troop instead it was in the
first
week females were much more relaxed and
were willing to take a chance and what
you saw was like in a world in which
like females were grooming you and big
adult males weren't dumping on you and
you could sit under like olive trees and
all of that over the course of the first
six months after the transfer these guys
dropped the
aggressiveness it was not inev State
them it was a default they
defaulted they were not stressed and
dumped on because the females weren't
stressed and dumped on because the
resident adult males were nicer guys
this trickled down decrease of stress
and they would default and six months
into it they were like one of the
regular old like commune hippies there
it was transmission that's insanely cool
that's an insanely cool story and so
posit and optimistic that's it's amazing
that you know given the
multigenerational proclivity let's say
of the baboon tribes to be relatively
Psychopathic it's amazing that there is
that much behavioral variation left in
this species to be transformed that
rapidly that's single generation
essentially I mean you you get a bit
more than one generation there but
that's transformation within a single
generation it'sing anyone who says like
humans don't have that much cultural
malleability hidden in them um what
baboons are more sophisticated and their
their potential variety of of social
systems anyone who says like humans are
not capable of having a radical
transformation blah blah like if baboom
can do it and they were literally I I I
studied at college with this guy Irv
devor I think you overlapped with him
when you were at Harvard who was like
the king of B field biology and I've
been writing fan letters to him from the
time I was 12 or so and went to study
with him and he was the person who
literally wrote The Textbook about
baboons and made them the textbook
example of the inevitability of
stratified male-dominated societies with
high right right and like ridiculously
inevitability because they go out and
Hunt inevitably aggression patriarchy
evil patriarchy exactly Dawn Of Man
territorial 1960s Robert arrey stuff and
like baboons were the textbook example
and in one generation it could be
transformed that's amazing then is uh
what does in that culture were their
vulnerabilities built into it right
right right like are they as good at
defending themsel against Lions for
example probably though you know they
probably are I doubt if I doubt if it's
that simple it's that you get rid of the
aggressive guys and they you know the
hyper aggressive guys because they're
not exactly heroic aggressive Defenders
they're more like impulsive Psychopaths
so I doubt very much that that would
constitute a downside we have to stop
we're 106 minutes in I don't want to
stop because I didn't get to talk to you
about stress which I really did want to
talk to you about and we just barely
touched on your fieldwork and so maybe
we would have a chance to continue this
discussion because there's lots of other
avenues we could walk down especially on
the stress front because there's like
there's and there's more on the dopamine
front too I talked to Carl friston about
the fact for example that dopamine also
signals incremental progress towards a
valid goal and reduction in entropy so
positive emotion signals reduction in
entropy and negative emotion signal
signals increase and that's like you can
talk about that for like five decades
and so I would love to talk to you again
I am going to talk to Dr spolsky for
another half an hour for those of you
who are watching on the YouTube side we
usually delve into more autobiographical
issues so I'm very curious to know for
example how the hell he ended up on the
serengetti surrounded by baboons you
know he must have done something
terrible in a previous life that's my
theory so we'll find out about that when
we switch over to the Daily wire plus
side thank you to the film crew here in
Florence for facilitating this
conversation and to the Daily wire plus
folks for making this possible and thank
you very much I've been trying to get
you on this podcast for a long time I'm
a great admirer of your work I learned
all sorts of things from you over the
years that have been extremely useful to
me so it's pleasure to talk to you and
um and to everyone watching and
listening thank you very much for your
time and attention thank you sir huge
pleasure at this end I feel giddi with
intellectual
stimulation hey we got the dopamine
circuits mutually entangled man we'll
we'll we'll talk very soon and for
everyone else bye and and we'll see you
on another YouTube
[Music]
site